{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\par
</span><span class="jawhistText">\par
</span><span class="priestlyText">\par
</span><span class="redactorText">\par
\par
<span class="chapterTitleText">The Creation of the World</span><span class="priestlyText">\par
1 In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth. 2 The earth was without form and void, and darkness was over the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters.\par
\par
3 And God said, \ldblquote Let there be light,\rdblquote  and there was light. 4 And God saw that the light was good. And God separated the light from the darkness. 5 God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, the first day.\par
\par
6 And God said, \ldblquote Let there be an expanse in the midst of the waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters.\rdblquote  7 And God made the expanse and separated the waters that were under the expanse from the waters that were above the expanse. And it was so. 8 And God called the expanse Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, the second day.\par
\par
9 And God said, \ldblquote Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear.\rdblquote  And it was so. 10 God called the dry land Earth, and the waters that were gathered together he called Seas. And God saw that it was good.\par
\par
11 And God said, \ldblquote Let the earth sprout vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit in which is their seed, each according to its kind, on the earth.\rdblquote  And it was so. 12 The earth brought forth vegetation, plants yielding seed according to their own kinds, and trees bearing fruit in which is their seed, each according to its kind. And God saw that it was good. 13 And there was evening and there was morning, the third day.\par
\par
14 And God said, \ldblquote Let there be lights in the expanse of the heavens to separate the day from the night. And let them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and years, 15 and let them be lights in the expanse of the heavens to give light upon the earth.\rdblquote  And it was so. 16 And God made the two great lights\f1\emdash the greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night\emdash and the stars. 17 And God set them in the expanse of the heavens to give light on the earth, 18 to rule over the day and over the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. And God saw that it was good. 19 And there was evening and there was morning, the fourth day.\par
\par
20 And God said, \ldblquote Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth across the expanse of the heavens.\rdblquote  21 So God created the great sea creatures and every living creature that moves, with which the waters swarm, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good. 22 And God blessed them, saying, \ldblquote Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.\rdblquote  23 And there was evening and there was morning, the fifth day.\par
\par
24 And God said, \ldblquote Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kinds\emdash livestock and creeping things and beasts of the earth according to their kinds.\rdblquote  And it was so. 25 And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kinds and the livestock according to their kinds, and everything that creeps on the ground according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.\par
\par
26 Then God said, \ldblquote Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.\rdblquote\par
\par
27 So God created man in his own image,\par
    in the image of God he created him;\par
    male and female he created them.\par
\par
28 And God blessed them. And God said to them, \ldblquote Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth.\rdblquote  29 And God said, \ldblquote Behold, I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the face of all the earth, and every tree with seed in its fruit. You shall have them for food. 30 And to every beast of the earth and to every bird of the heavens and to everything that creeps on the earth, everything that has the breath of life, I have given every green plant for food.\rdblquote  And it was so. 31 And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.\f0 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\f1\par
\par
The Seventh Day, God Rests\f0 </span><span class="priestlyText">\f1\par
2 Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them. 2 And on the seventh day God finished his work that he had done, and he rested on the seventh day from all his work that he had done. 3 So God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it God rested from all his work that he had done in creation.\f0 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\f1\par
\par
The Creation of Man and Woman\f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1\par
4 These are the generations\par
of the heavens and the earth when they were created,\f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1\par
in the day that the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 made the earth and the heavens.\par
\par
5 When no bush of the field was yet in the land and no small plant of the field had yet sprung up\emdash for the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 had not caused it to rain on the land, and there was no man to work the ground, 6 and a mist was going up from the land and was watering the whole face of the ground\emdash  7 then the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 formed the man of dust from the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living creature. 8 And the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 planted a garden in Eden, in the east, and there he put the man whom he had formed. 9 And out of the ground the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 made to spring up every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food. The tree of life was in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.\par
\par
10 A river flowed out of Eden to water the garden, and there it divided and became four rivers. 11 The name of the first is the Pishon. It is the one that flowed around the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold. 12 And the gold of that land is good; bdellium and onyx stone are there. 13 The name of the second river is the Gihon. It is the one that flowed around the whole land of Cush. 14 And the name of the third river is the Tigris, which flows east of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.\par
\par
15 The Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to work it and keep it. 16 And the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 commanded the man, saying, \ldblquote You may surely eat of every tree of the garden, 17 but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die.\rdblquote\par
\par
18 Then the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 said, \ldblquote It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him a helper fit for him.\rdblquote  19 Now out of the ground the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 had formed every beast of the field and every bird of the heavens and brought them to the man to see what he would call them. And whatever the man called every living creature, that was its name. 20 The man gave names to all livestock and to the birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field. But for Adam there was not found a helper fit for him. 21 So the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and while he slept took one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh. 22 And the rib that the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 had taken from the man he made into a woman and brought her to the man. 23 Then the man said,\par
\par
\ldblquote This at last is bone of my bones\par
    and flesh of my flesh;\par
she shall be called Woman,\par
    because she was taken out of Man.\rdblquote\par
\par
24 Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, and they shall become one flesh. 25 And the man and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed.\f0 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\f1\par
\par
The Fall\f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1\par
3 Now the serpent was more crafty than any other beast of the field that the Lord \f0 <span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 </span><span class="jawhistText">\f1 had made.\par
\par
He said to the woman, \ldblquote Did God actually say, \lquote You shall not eat of any tree in the garden\rquote ?\rdblquote  2 And the woman said to the serpent, \ldblquote We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden, 3 but God said, \lquote You shall not eat of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.\rquote\rdblquote  4 But the serpent said to the woman, \ldblquote You will not surely die. 5 For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.\rdblquote  6 So when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took of its fruit and ate, and she also gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate. 7 Then the eyes of both were opened, and they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig leaves together and made themselves loincloths.\par
\par
8 And they heard the sound of the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 <span class="jawhistText">\f1 walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 <span class="jawhistText">\f1 among the trees of the garden. 9 But the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 <span class="jawhistText">\f1 called to the man and said to him, \ldblquote Where are you?\rdblquote  10 And he said, \ldblquote I heard the sound of you in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid myself.\rdblquote  11 He said, \ldblquote Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten of the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?\rdblquote  12 The man said, \ldblquote The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate.\rdblquote  13 Then the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 <span class="jawhistText">\f1 said to the woman, \ldblquote What is this that you have done?\rdblquote  The woman said, \ldblquote The serpent deceived me, and I ate.\rdblquote\par
\par
14 The Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 <span class="jawhistText">\f1 said to the serpent,\par
\par
\ldblquote Because you have done this,\par
    cursed are you above all livestock\par
    and above all beasts of the field;\par
on your belly you shall go,\par
    and dust you shall eat\par
    all the days of your life.\par
15 I will put enmity between you and the woman,\par
    and between your offspring and her offspring;\par
he shall bruise your head,\par
    and you shall bruise his heel.\rdblquote\par
\par
16 To the woman he said,\par
\par
\ldblquote I will surely multiply your pain in childbearing;\par
    in pain you shall bring forth children.\par
Your desire shall be contrary to your husband,\par
    but he shall rule over you.\rdblquote\par
\par
17 And to Adam he said,\par
\par
\ldblquote Because you have listened to the voice of your wife\par
    and have eaten of the tree\par
of which I commanded you,\par
    \lquote You shall not eat of it,\rquote\par
cursed is the ground because of you;\par
    in pain you shall eat of it all the days of your life;\par
18 thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you;\par
    and you shall eat the plants of the field.\par
19 By the sweat of your face\par
    you shall eat bread,\par
till you return to the ground,\par
    for out of it you were taken;\par
for you are dust,\par
    and to dust you shall return.\rdblquote\par
\par
20 The man called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living. 21 And the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 <span class="jawhistText">\f1 made for Adam and for his wife garments of skins and clothed them.\par
\par
22 Then the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 <span class="jawhistText">\f1 said, \ldblquote Behold, the man has become like one of us in knowing good and evil. Now, lest he reach out his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat, and live forever\emdash\rdblquote  23 therefore the Lord \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 God \f0 <span class="jawhistText">\f1 sent him out from the garden of Eden to work the ground from which he was taken. 24 He drove out the man, and at the east of the garden of Eden he placed the cherubim and a flaming sword that turned every way to guard the way to the tree of life.\f0\par
}
 