{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil Calibri;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs22\lang9 <span class="chapterTitleText">Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus</span><span class="editorText">\par
18 When Jesus had spoken these words, </span><span class="sAuthorText">he went out </span><span class="redactorText">with his disciples across the brook Kidron, </span><span class="sAuthorText">where there was a garden, which he and his disciples entered. </span><span class="editorText">2 Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, for Jesus often met there with his disciples. </span><span class="sAuthorText">3 So Judas, having procured a band of soldiers and some officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, went there with lanterns and torches and weapons. </span><span class="editorText">4 Then Jesus, knowing all that would happen to him, came forward and </span><span class="sAuthorText">said to them, \ldblquote Whom do you seek?\rdblquote  5 They answered him, \ldblquote Jesus of Nazareth.\rdblquote  Jesus said to them, \ldblquote I am he.\rdblquote  </span><span class="editorText">Judas, who betrayed him, was standing with them. </span><span class="sAuthorText">6 When Jesus said to them, \ldblquote I am he,\rdblquote  they drew back and fell to the ground. </span><span class="editorText">7 So he asked them again, \ldblquote Whom do you seek?\rdblquote  And they said, \ldblquote Jesus of Nazareth.\rdblquote  8 Jesus answered, \ldblquote I told you that I am he. So, if you seek me, let these men go.\rdblquote  </span><span class="redactorText">9 This was to fulfill the word that he had spoken: \ldblquote Of those whom you gave me I have lost not one.\rdblquote  </span><span class="editorText">10 Then Simon Peter, </span><span class="sAuthorText">having a sword, drew it and struck the high priest's servant and cut off his right ear. </span><span class="editorText">(The servant's name was Malchus.) </span><span class="redactorText">11 So Jesus said to Peter, \ldblquote Put your sword into its sheath; shall I not drink the cup that the Father has given me?\rdblquote </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\par
\par
Jesus Faces Annas and Caiaphas</span><span class="sAuthorText">\par
12 So the band of soldiers and their captain </span><span class="editorText">and the officers of the Jews </span><span class="sAuthorText">arrested Jesus and bound him. </span><span class="editorText">13 First </span><span class="sAuthorText">they led him to </span><span class="editorText">Annas, for he was the father-in-law of </span><span class="sAuthorText">Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. </span><span class="editorText">14 It was Caiaphas who had advised the Jews that it would be expedient that one man should die for the people.</span><span class="chapterTitleText">\par
\par
Peter Denies Jesus</span><span class="editorText">\par
15 Simon Peter </span><span class="gAuthorText">followed Jesus</span><span class="editorText">, and so did </span><span class="gAuthorText">another disciple. </span><span class="editorText">Since that disciple was known to the high priest, </span><span class="gAuthorText">he entered with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest, 16 but Peter stood outside at the door. So the other disciple</span><span class="editorText">, who was known to the high priest, </span><span class="gAuthorText">went out and spoke to the servant girl who kept watch at the door, and brought Peter in. 17 The servant girl at the door said to Peter, \ldblquote You also are not one of this man's disciples, are you?\rdblquote  He said, \ldblquote I am not.\rdblquote  18 Now the servants and officers had made a charcoal fire, because it was cold, and they were standing and warming themselves. Peter also was with them, standing and warming himself.</span><span class="chapterTitleText">\par
\par
The High Priest Questions Jesus</span><span class="sAuthorText">\par
19 The high priest then questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching. </span><span class="editorText">20 Jesus answered him, \ldblquote I have spoken openly to the world. I have always taught in synagogues and in the temple, where all Jews come together. I have said nothing in secret. 21 Why do you ask me? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them; they know what I said.\rdblquote  </span><span class="sAuthorText">22 When he had said these things, one of the officers standing by struck Jesus with his hand, saying, \ldblquote Is that how you answer the high priest?\rdblquote  </span><span class="editorText">23 Jesus answered him, \ldblquote If what I said is wrong, bear witness about the wrong; but if what I said is right, why do you strike me?\rdblquote  </span><span class="redactorText">24 Annas then sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.</span><span class="chapterTitleText">\par
\par
Peter Denies Jesus Again</span><span class="editorText">\par
25 Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. </span><span class="gAuthorText">So they said to him, \ldblquote You also are not one of his disciples, are you?\rdblquote  He denied it and said, \ldblquote I am not.\rdblquote  26 One of the servants of the high priest</span><span class="editorText">, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, </span><span class="gAuthorText">asked, \ldblquote Did I not see you in the garden with him?\rdblquote  27 Peter again denied it, and at once a rooster crowed.</span><span class="chapterTitleText">\par
\par
Jesus Before Pilate</span><span class="gAuthorText">\par
28 Then they led Jesus from the house of Caiaphas to the governor's headquarters. It was early morning. They themselves did not enter the governor's headquarters, so that they would not be defiled, but could eat the Passover. 29 So Pilate went outside to them and said, \ldblquote What accusation do you bring against this man?\rdblquote  </span><span class="editorText">30 They answered him, \ldblquote If this man were not doing evil, we would not have delivered him over to you.\rdblquote  </span><span class="gAuthorText">31 Pilate said to them, \ldblquote Take him yourselves and judge him by your own law.\rdblquote  The Jews said to him, \ldblquote It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death.\rdblquote  </span><span class="redactorText">32 This was to fulfill the word that Jesus had spoken to show by what kind of death he was going to die.</span><span class="chapterTitleText">\par
\par
My Kingdom Is Not of This World</span><span class="gAuthorText">\par
33 So Pilate entered his headquarters again and called Jesus and said to him, \ldblquote Are you the King of the Jews?\rdblquote  34 Jesus answered, \ldblquote Do you say this of your own accord, or did others say it to you about me?\rdblquote  35 Pilate answered, \ldblquote Am I a Jew? Your own nation and the chief priests have delivered you over to me. What have you done?\rdblquote  </span><span class="editorText">36 Jesus answered, </span><span class="gAuthorText">\ldblquote My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would have been fighting, that I might not be delivered over to the Jews. But my kingdom is not from the world.\rdblquote  37 Then Pilate said to him, \ldblquote So you are a king?\rdblquote  Jesus answered, \ldblquote You say that I am a king. For this purpose I was born and for this purpose I have come into the world\f1\emdash to bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.\rdblquote  38 Pilate said to him, \ldblquote What is truth?\rdblquote\f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1\par
\par
After he had said this, he went back outside to the Jews and told them, \ldblquote I find no guilt in him. 39 But you have a custom that I should release one man for you at the Passover. So do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?\rdblquote  40 They cried out again, \ldblquote Not this man, but Barabbas!\rdblquote  Now Barabbas was a robber.\f0 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\f1\par
\par
Jesus Delivered to Be Crucified\f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1\par
19 Then Pilate took Jesus and flogged him. 2 And the soldiers twisted together a crown of thorns and put it on his head and arrayed him in a purple robe. 3 They came up to him, saying, \ldblquote Hail, King of the Jews!\rdblquote  and struck him with their hands. 4 Pilate went out \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 again \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 and said to them, \ldblquote See, I am bringing him out to you that you may know that I find no guilt in him.\rdblquote  5 So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 Pilate said to them, \ldblquote Behold the man!\rdblquote  6 When the chief priests and the officers saw him, they cried out, \ldblquote Crucify him, crucify him!\rdblquote  Pilate said to them, \ldblquote Take him yourselves and crucify him, for I find no guilt in him.\rdblquote  7 The Jews answered him, \ldblquote We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die because he has made himself the Son of God.\rdblquote  8 When Pilate heard this statement, he was even more afraid. \f0 </span><span class="gAuthorText">\f1 9 He entered his headquarters again and said to Jesus, \ldblquote Where are you from?\rdblquote  But Jesus gave him no answer. 10 So Pilate said to him, \ldblquote You will not speak to me? Do you not know that I have authority to release you and authority to crucify you?\rdblquote  11 Jesus answered him, \ldblquote You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been given you from above. \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 Therefore he who delivered me over to you has the greater sin.\rdblquote\f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1\par
\par
12 From then on Pilate sought to release him, but the Jews cried out, \ldblquote If you release this man, you are not Caesar's friend. Everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar.\rdblquote  13 So when Pilate heard these words, he brought Jesus out and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called The Stone Pavement\f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 , and in Aramaic Gabbatha. 14 Now it was the day of Preparation of the Passover. \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 It was about the sixth hour. He said to the Jews, \ldblquote Behold your King!\rdblquote  15 They cried out, \ldblquote Away with him, away with him, crucify him!\rdblquote  Pilate said to them, \ldblquote Shall I crucify your King?\rdblquote  The chief priests answered, \ldblquote We have no king but Caesar.\rdblquote  16 So he delivered him over to them to be crucified.\f0 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\f1\par
\par
The Crucifixion\f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1\par
So they took Jesus, 17 and he went out, bearing his own cross, to the place called The Place of a Skull, \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 which in Aramaic is called Golgotha. \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 18 There they crucified him, and with him two others, one on either side, and Jesus between them. 19 Pilate also wrote an inscription and put it on the cross. It read, \ldblquote Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.\rdblquote  \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 20 Many of the Jews read this inscription, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and it was written in Aramaic, in Latin, and in Greek. \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 21 So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, \ldblquote Do not write, \lquote The King of the Jews,\rquote  but rather, \lquote This man said, I am King of the Jews.\rquote\rdblquote  22 Pilate answered, \ldblquote What I have written I have written.\rdblquote\par
\par
23 When the soldiers had crucified Jesus, they took his garments and divided them into four parts, one part for each soldier; also his tunic. But the tunic was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom, 24 so they said to one another, \ldblquote Let us not tear it, but cast lots for it to see whose it shall be.\rdblquote  \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 This was to fulfill the Scripture which says,\par
\par
\ldblquote They divided my garments among them,\par
    and for my clothing they cast lots.\rdblquote\par
\par
So the soldiers did these things, \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 25 but standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. \f0 </span><span class="editorText">\f1 26 When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, \ldblquote Woman, behold, your son!\rdblquote  27 Then he said to the disciple, \ldblquote Behold, your mother!\rdblquote  And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home.\f0 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\f1\par
\par
The Death of Jesus\f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1\par
28 After this, Jesus, knowing that all was now finished, said \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 (to fulfill the Scripture), \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1\ldblquote I thirst.\rdblquote  29 A jar full of sour wine stood there, so they put a sponge full of the sour wine on a hyssop branch and held it to his mouth. 30 When Jesus had received the sour wine, he said, \ldblquote It is finished,\rdblquote  and he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.\f0 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\f1\par
\par
Jesus' Side Is Pierced\f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1\par
31 Since it was the day of Preparation, and so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a high day), the Jews asked Pilate that their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away. 32 So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who had been crucified with him. 33 But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs. 34 But one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and at once there came out blood and water. 35 He who saw it has borne witness\emdash his testimony is true, and he knows that he is telling the truth\emdash that you also may believe. 36 For these things took place that the Scripture might be fulfilled: \ldblquote Not one of his bones will be broken.\rdblquote  37 And again another Scripture says, \ldblquote They will look on him whom they have pierced.\rdblquote\f0 </span><span class="chapterTitleText">\f1\par
\par
Jesus Is Buried\f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1\par
38 After these things \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 Joseph of Arimathea\f0 </span><span class="editorText">\f1 , who was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 asked Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave him permission. So he came and took away his body. \f0 </span><span class="editorText">\f1 39 Nicodemus also, who earlier had come to Jesus by night, came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about seventy-five pounds in weight. \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 40 So they took the body of Jesus and bound it in linen cloths with the spices, as is the burial custom of the Jews. 41 Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb \f0 </span><span class="editorText">\f1 in which no one had yet been laid. \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 42 So \f0 </span><span class="redactorText">\f1 because of the Jewish day of Preparation, \f0 </span><span class="sAuthorText">\f1 since the tomb was close at hand, they laid Jesus there.\f0\lang1033 </span>\lang9\par
}
 